[<b>SPEC</b>] JVM Client98
Help                                                     System Requirements

SPEC intends that this benchmark suite be applicable to networked and
standalone Java client computers, either with disk (e.g., PC, workstation)
or without disk (e.g., network computer) executing programs in an ordinary
Java platform environment. Specific system requirements are:

Java Virtual Machine

A JVM compatible with Java version 1.1 or later or required. These
benchmarks will not run on 1.0.2 based systems. These benchmarks are
relatively stressful, and may expose bugs in a JVM which have not previously
been noted. In such case some of the benchmarks may fail to run or may give
incorrect results. SPECjvm98 metrics for such systems may not be reported
until the bugs are corrected and a valid run is made.

The InstallShield installation program is looking for a JVM with version
number 1.1 (or 1.1.X). If you are using a JVM version 1.2, it may complain
that you don't have an up-to-date JVM. You should be able to select it
anyway and continue successfully with the installation. However, in case
that fails, there are two work-arounds: 1) install the benchmarks with
version 1.1 and then proceed to run them with 1.2; or 2) install the
benchmarks from the install.tar.gz archive.

The benchmark suite is run as an applet from a web browser or applet viewer;
see Using the Benchmarks. Some of the products that have been tested with
this suite are:

   * Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.1.X
   * Microsoft Internet Explorer 4.01
   * Netscape Navigator 4.05 (See Common Problems)
   * Sun HotJava 1.X

Memory

The benchmarks generally require a system with about 32MB of memory.
Different Java implementations may require more or less memory, and
different operating systems may require different amounts of additional
memory. Systems with less memory may be able to run the benchmarks, albeit
with some performance penalty if additional garbage collection is required.
Correspondingly, systems with a great deal more memory may be able to run
the benchmarks faster.

Accordingly SPEC reports results in three categories of physical memory
sizes:

   * 0 through 48MB
   * from 48MB through 256 MB
   * greater than 256MB

Disk

No local disk is required.

Processor and Speed

No particular processor or speed is required. However, your patience to wait
for results may impose some practical limit on processor speed. A typical
(three executions of each benchmark) run of the suite on the reference
machine, a 133MHz PowerPC 604, takes four to five hours elapsed time.

Operating System

No particular type of operating system is required. However, refer the the
Common Problems section of the Users Guide for a bug in this version
affecting MacOS and mainframe operating systems.

Web Server

For reportable results a web server is required to store the benchmark
suite, and to serve class and data files to the benchmark applet. This web
server may be on another machine networked to the client system under test,
or the web server may be located on the client machine (http://localhost) in
which case no network is required.

For research purposes the benchmarks may be run directly from local disk
either as an applet or as an application.

Graphics

Reportable results require use of the SPEC tool harness which requires a
graphics display. For research purposes the benchmarks may be run from the
command line in which case the tool harness will not use an interactive GUI.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Image] Next topic: Using the Benchmarks
