SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC.

SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. THROUGH ITS
SUN LABORATORIES DIVISION ("SUN") IS
WILLING TO LICENSE THE JAVA (tm)
COMPILER SOFTWARE IN OBJECT CODE
FORMAT, THE JAVA (tm) COMPILER
COMPILER (tm) SOFTWARE IN OBJECT
CODE FORMAT, SOFTWARE SAMPLE
GRAMMARS, A CONFORMANCE TEST PROGRAM
KNOWN AS "PEPTEST," AND THE
ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTATION
(collectively, the "Software") TO
LICENSEE, AS DEFINED BELOW, ONLY ON
THE CONDITION THAT LICENSEE ACCEPTS
ALL THE TERMS CONTAINED IN THIS
LICENSE AGREEMENT.

PLEASE READ THE TERMS CAREFULLY
BEFORE USING THE SOFTWARE.  LICENSEE
ACKNOWLEDGES THAT LICENSEE HAS READ
AND UNDERSTANDS THIS AGREEMENT AND
AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ITS TERMS AND
CONDITIONS.  IF LICENSEE DOES NOT
ACCEPT THESE LICENSE TERMS, SUN DOES
NOT GRANT ANY LICENSE TO THE
SOFTWARE.

1.  LICENSE GRANT

(A)  As the Software has been
selected by the Members of the
Standard Performance Evaluation
Corporation ("SPEC") for
incorporation into one of its
benchmark suites, Sun hereby grants
to SPEC (a "Licensee") a
non-exclusive, non-transferable,
royalty-free right to use, reproduce
and distribute the Software to third
parties for a fee or otherwise on a
commercial basis, in object code
format and on CD-ROM or via any
other medium, for use by such third
parties solely as set forth in
Section 1(B) below.

(B)  Sun grants each and every third
party who purchases or otherwise
acquires the Software from SPEC,
whether by CD or via another medium,
(each, a "Licensee") a
non-exclusive, non-transferable,
royalty-free right to download,
install, compile and use this
Software, in object code format,
exclusively with sample grammars
provided by Sun solely for the
purposes of (i) using "PepTest" to
determine whether other software and
hardware products conform to the
Java (TM) standards set by Sun and
(ii) using the rest of the Software
as a benchmark against which
Licensee can evaluate the
performance of such other software
and hardware products.

2.  LICENSE RESTRICTIONS

This Software is licensed, not sold,
to Licensee only under the terms of
this Agreement, and Sun reserves all
rights not expressly granted to
Licensee.  Licensee may not use,
copy, modify or transfer the
Software or any copy thereof or
create any derivative works
therefrom except as expressly
provided for in this Agreement.
Licensee may not reverse engineer,
disassemble, decompile or translate
the Software or otherwise attempt to
derive the source code of the
Software except as allowed by law.
Licensee may not rent, lease, loan,
sell or distribute the Software or
any part thereof for any purpose,
whether commercial or otherwise,
except as expressly provided for in
this Agreement.

THE SOFTWARE IS NOT DESIGNED OR
INTENDED FOR USE IN ON-LINE CONTROL
OF AIRCRAFT, AIR TRAFFIC, AIRCRAFT
NAVIGATION OR AIRCRAFT
COMMUNICATIONS; IN THE DESIGN,
CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION OR
MAINTENANCE OF ANY NUCLEAR FACILITY
OR IN ANY LIFE-SAVING OR LIFE
SUPPORT APPLICATION.  SUN DISCLAIMS
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTY OF
FITNESS FOR SUCH USES.  LICENSEE
REPRESENTS AND WARRANTS THAT IT WILL
NOT USE THE SOFTWARE FOR SUCH
PURPOSES.

Licensee will, at its expense,
defend, indemnify and hold Sun
harmless from and against any third
party claims, including costs and
reasonable attorneys' fees, and be
wholly responsible for any other
liabilities or damages arising out
of or related to Licensee's use of
the Software or breach of the terms
hereof.

3.  OWNERSHIP

(A)  As between Sun and Licensee,
Sun is and will be the sole and
exclusive owner of all right, title
and interest in and to the Software
other than the limited rights
granted to Licensee in this
Agreement.

(B)  The Software is protected by
United States copyright law and
international treaty and
unauthorized reproduction or
distribution is subject to civil and
criminal penalties.  Licensee shall
retain and reproduce all copyright
and other proprietary notices
presently on the Software and SPEC
shall only name or otherwise list
the Software by title on a CD-ROM,
related documents or other materials
or any other medium in a format
identical to that used by Sun,
including all trademark symbols.
Java (TM) and the family of marks
based on the word JAVA
(collectively, the "Mark") are
trademarks or registered trademarks
of Sun in the U.S. and other
countries.  No right, title or
interest in or to any trademarks,
service marks or trade names of Sun
or Sun's licensors is granted
hereunder.

(C)  Accordingly, Licensee
acknowledges that Sun owns the Mark
and all goodwill associated
therewith.  Licensee further
acknowledges that it has no rights
of any kind whatsoever anywhere in
the world with respect to the Mark.
Licensee agrees that all past and
future use of the Mark by Licensee
anywhere in the world inures to the
sole benefit of Sun.  Licensee
agrees that it will take no action
anywhere in the world inconsistent
with Sun's ownership of the Mark and
will not attempt to register the
Mark or any mark including the word
JAVA anywhere in the world.
Licensee agrees that it will not
attack Sun's ownership in and title
to the Mark anywhere in the world
and that it will not attack the
validity of the license granted
herein.

SUN MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND RESPECTING
THE MARK, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO ANY WARRANTY OF NONINFRINGEMENT
OR OF THE VALIDITY OF SUN'S RIGHTS
IN THE MARK IN ANY COUNTRY AND
DISCLAIMS ANY AND ALL WARRANTIES
RESPECTING THE MARK THAT MIGHT
OTHERWISE BE IMPLIED BY APPLICABLE
LAW.

4.  TERM, TERMINATION AND SURVIVAL 

(A)  The Agreement is effective
until terminated.  Upon any
termination, Licensee must
immediately cease all use and
distribution of the Software and
destroy all copies of the Software
in its possession or, upon Sun's
request, return the Software to
Sun.  Upon any termination, the
parties agree that no implied
license shall arise.

(B)  Licensee may terminate this
Agreement at any time by destroying
all copies of the Software in its
possession.

(C)  This Agreement will immediately
terminate without notice if Licensee
fails to comply with any obligation
of this Agreement.

(D)  At such time as SPEC
permanently ceases its distribution
of the Software, this Agreement
shall automatically terminate as to
SPEC.

(E)  All licenses granted to third
parties pursuant to Section 1(B)
above prior to any termination of
this Agreement shall continue in
accordance with their terms.

(F)  The relevant provisions of
Sections 2 through 9 shall survive
any termination of this Agreement,
as applicable.

5.  NO WARRANTY

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED TO LICENSEE
"AS IS."  ALL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
CONDITIONS, REPRESENTATIONS AND
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY,
SATISFACTORY QUALITY, FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR
NON-INFRINGEMENT, ARE DISCLAIMED.
LICENSEE ACKNOWLEDGES AND AGREES
THAT (I) THE SOFTWARE IS
NON-COMMERCIAL, EXPERIMENTAL
SOFTWARE; (II) THE SOFTWARE MAY
CONTAIN ERRORS, DESIGN FLAWS OR
OTHER PROBLEMS; (III) THE SOFTWARE
MAY NOT FUNCTION FULLY OR ADEQUATELY
UPON INSTALLATION; (IV) IT MAY NOT
BE POSSIBLE TO RENDER THE SOFTWARE
FUNCTIONAL; (V) USE OF THE SOFTWARE
MAY RESULT IN UNEXPECTED RESULTS,
LOSS OF DATA OR OTHER UNPREDICTABLE
DAMAGE OR LOSS TO LICENSEE; (VI) SUN
HAS NO OBLIGATION WHATSOEVER TO
CONTINUE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
SOFTWARE; AND (VII) SUN HAS NO
OBLIGATION WHATSOEVER TO MAINTAIN OR
SUPPORT THE SOFTWARE.

6.  LIMITATION OF LIABILITY

IN NO EVENT WILL SUN BE LIABLE IN
ANY WAY FOR ANY DIRECT DAMAGES OR
ANY INDIRECT, PUNITIVE, SPECIAL,
INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
OF ANY KIND (INCLUDING LOSS OF USE
OR DATA; LOSS OF BUSINESS, REVENUE,
PROFITS OR OTHER ECONOMIC ADVANTAGE;
OR PERSONAL INJURY OR PROPERTY
DAMAGE) INCURRED BY LICENSEE OR ANY
THIRD PARTY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION IN
CONTRACT, TORT, BASED ON A WARRANTY
OR OTHERWISE, ARISING OUT OF OR
RELATED TO THIS AGREEMENT OR THE
SOFTWARE IN ANY WAY EVEN IF SUN HAS
BEEN PREVIOUSLY ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES OR IF
SUCH DAMAGES ARE FORESEEABLE.

7.  GOVERNMENT USERS

The Software is provided with
restricted rights.  With respect to
any acquisition of the Software by
or for any unit or agency of the
U.S.  Government, the Software shall
be classified as "commercial
computer software" as that term is
defined in the applicable provision
of the Federal Acquisition
Regulations ("FAR") and supplements
thereto, including the Department of
Defense (DoD) FAR Supplement
("DFARS").  If the Software is
supplied for use by the DoD, the
Software is delivered subject to the
terms of this Agreement and either
(i) in accordance with DFARS
227.7202-1(a) and 227.7202-3(a) or
(ii) with restricted rights in
accordance with DFARS
252.227-7013(c)(1)(ii) (OCT 1988),
as applicable.  If the Software is
supplied for use by a federal agency
other than the DoD, the Software is
restricted computer software
delivered subject to the terms of
this Agreement and (i) FAR
12.212(a); (ii) FAR 52.227-19; or
(iii) FAR 52.227-14 (ALT III), as
applicable.

Sun Microsystems, Inc., 901 San Antonio Road, Palo Alto, CA  94303, USA

8.  EXPORT LAW

Licensee acknowledges and agrees
that this Software and/or any
related technology is subject to the
U.S. Export Administration Laws and
Regulations.  Diversion of such
Software and/or technology contrary
to U.S.  law is prohibited.
Licensee agrees and certifies that
none of this Software and/or
technology, nor any direct product
therefrom, is being or will be
acquired for, shipped, transferred
or reexported, directly or
indirectly, to proscribed or
embargoed countries or their
nationals, nor be used for nuclear
activities, chemical biological
weapons, or missile projects or
other purposes prohibited by U.S.
export laws unless authorized by the
U.S.  Government.  Proscribed
countries are set forth in the U.S.
Export Administration Regulations.
Countries subject to U.S. embargo
are:  Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North
Korea, Syria and the Sudan.  This
list is subject to change without
further notice from Sun, and
Licensee must comply with the list
as it exists in fact.  Licensee
certifies that it is not on the U.S.
Department of Commerce's Denied
Persons List or affiliated lists or
on the U.S. Department of Treasury's
Specially Designated Nationals
List.

Licensee agrees to comply strictly
with all U.S. export laws and assume
sole responsibility for obtaining
licenses to export or reexport as
may be required.  Licensee is
responsible for complying with any
applicable local laws and
regulations, including but not
limited to, the export and import
laws and regulations of other
countries.

9.  MISCELLANEOUS

This Agreement will be construed
under and governed by California law
and controlling federal law as
applied to transactions taking place
wholly within California between
California residents; the United
Nations Convention on Contracts for
the International Sale of Goods
shall not apply.  The parties agree
that any action shall be brought in
the United States District Court for
the Northern District of California
or the California Superior Court for
the County of Santa Clara, as
applicable, and the parties hereby
submit exclusively to the personal
jurisdiction and venue thereof.
Licensee may not assign this
Agreement or any of its rights and
obligations hereunder to any party.
The official text of this Agreement
is in the English language and any
interpretation or construction of
this Agreement will be based
thereon.  In the event that this
Agreement or any documents or
notices related to it are translated
into any other language, the English
language version will control.  This
Agreement (i) is the entire
agreement between Sun and Licensee
relating to the Software, (ii)
supersedes all prior or
contemporaneous oral or written
communications, proposals,
warranties, representations or
agreements with respect to the
Software and (iii) will prevail over
any conflicting or additional terms
of any subsequent quote, order,
acknowledgment or any other
communications by or between the
parties.  No modification to this
Agreement will be binding unless in
writing and signed by an authorized
representative of each party.
